RFD 243: scoped roles in access lists (#62814)
gravitational/teleport: rfd/0243-scoped-roles-in-access-lists.md

  name: a3e64073-8980-41aa-a7a0-dd23de40c38e
spec:
    access_list: west-admins
    name: alice@example.com
    membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_USER
version: v1
---
kind: access_list_member
metadata:
  name: c4c9d4b3-c57c-40de-a15e-e2425267a716
spec:
  access_list: west-admins
  name: bob@example.com
  membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_USER
version: v1
```

Under the hood the scoped access cache would materialize from this access list
the following scoped role assignments:

```yaml
kind: scoped_role_assignment
metadata:
  name: uuid1
scope: /
spec:
  user: alice@example.com
  assignments:
  - role: ops-admin
    scope: /ops/west
  - role: ops-access
    scope: /ops
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
version: v1
---
kind: scoped_role_assignment
metadata:
  name: uuid2
scope: /
spec:
  user: bob@example.com
  assignments:
  - role: ops-admin
    scope: /ops/west
  - role: ops-access
    scope: /ops
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
version: v1
```

These "materialized" scoped role assignments would be inserted into the scoped

> role assignment cache.

Author: The materialized scoped_role_assignment cache won't need to be maintained on all services. The ScopedAccessCache currently only exists on Auth (this is where materialized scoped_role_assignments will be injected, alongside regular scoped_role_assignments). A user's scoped role assignments are computed during login and put into a ScopePin that is included in the user cert. Nodes read the ScopePin to know what scoped roles the user currently has, and they read scoped roles to evaluate access. Nodes never need to read scoped_role_assignments

> role assignment cache.

Author: wait I'm off by 10x, 25k access lists with 200k members each would be 5 billion unique (list, member) pairs. 5M users in 1k lists each?

> role assignment cache.

Reviewer: Sorry I ment 25K access list with 200 members per access list on overage. So in total 25k * 200 = 5M access list members relation. 

But if is following is true
> The materialized scoped_role_assignment cache won't need to be maintained on all services.

And materialized cache will be only part of auth this comment seems to be invalid.

> role assignment cache.

Reviewer 2: Please note when assuming roles granted by access requests we currently calculate permissions using the backend instead of session cert. Scoped roles may need to be taken into account.

cannot contain both scoped role grants and requirement blocks.

UpdateAccessList (if it adds a scoped role assignment or requirement block),
and access list member creation methods, will have to traverse the access list
graph to assert that no transitive members of access lists that grant scoped
roles can contain requirement blocks.

It's likely to be prohibitively expensive to do this check while holding a
global backend lock (and it's not clear if it's possible to implement with
AtomicWrite) so this check will be best-effort.
If the invariant is violated, access lists with requirement blocks will not
result in scoped role assignments being materialized (they will be dropped by
the assignment materializer and the invalid list or membership will be logged).

* Materialized scoped role assignments will be created for each extant (user, list)
  where user is a member of list.
* Materialized scoped role assignments will be deleted when user ceases to be a
  member of a list.

These are not being written to the backend and thus cannot use AtomicWrite.
These invariants will be enforced when the scoped access cache is initialized,

> and when access lists and their members are created/updated/deleted.

Reviewer: The cache needs to have full materialized view  to be able deterministic process the request. Othwrise in the early init state the after process started depending on access list size the behavior in nondeterministic.

* `ops-access` in scope `/ops`

Access lists will not really be an alternative to scoped role assignments,
rather, they will essentially be a way of automating the definition of scoped
role assignments for many users at once.

For example, if you wanted to make both `alice@example.com` and `bob@example.com`
admins over the `/ops/west` scope, you could define an access list as follows:

```yaml
kind: access_list
metadata:
  name: west-admins
spec:
  title: "west admins"
  grants:
    scoped_roles:
      - role: ops-admin
        scope: /ops/west
      - role: ops-access
        scope: /ops
version: v1
---
kind: access_list_member
metadata:
  name: a3e64073-8980-41aa-a7a0-dd23de40c38e
spec:
    access_list: west-admins
    name: alice@example.com
    membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_USER
version: v1
---
kind: access_list_member
metadata:
  name: c4c9d4b3-c57c-40de-a15e-e2425267a716
spec:
  access_list: west-admins
  name: bob@example.com
  membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_USER
version: v1
```

Under the hood the scoped access cache would materialize from this access list
the following scoped role assignments:

```yaml
kind: scoped_role_assignment
metadata:

>   name: uuid1

Reviewer 3: If you're talking about hashing as an alternative to a UUID, a fully stable name presents a problem.  We specifically want to avoid _deliberate_ collisions as well as intentional ones (i.e. we don't want users able to predict the name of a materialized assignment).

We could alternatively rework assignments to be considered a separate `sub_kind` not create-able by users and use something like `<name>/<sub_kind>` as the primary key.  The thinking was that that might be more complexity and engineering overhead than just creating assignments at random IDs, but random IDs have their own challenges so maybe thats wrong.

>   name: uuid1

Author: Note I do already have a status field in the assignment linking to the originating list

```
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
```

I'm still considering the sub_kind and changing the id format

scope: /
spec:
  user: alice@example.com
  assignments:
  - role: ops-admin
    scope: /ops/west
  - role: ops-access
    scope: /ops
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
version: v1
---
kind: scoped_role_assignment
metadata:
  name: uuid2
scope: /
spec:
  user: bob@example.com
  assignments:
  - role: ops-admin
    scope: /ops/west
  - role: ops-access
    scope: /ops
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
version: v1
```

These "materialized" scoped role assignments would be inserted into the scoped
role assignment cache.
Everything that already works with scoped role assignments today will not need
to know or care about access lists, they will just handle the resulting
assignments as usual.

### Nested list membership

Access list members can either be users or other access lists.
When listA has member listB, it means that all members of listB are nested
members of listA.
In this case listA has delegated part of its membership definition to listB.
In general, a user is a nested member of listA if they are a direct member of

> listA or they are a nested member of any list that is a direct member of listA.

Reviewer 2: "a user is a nested member of listA if they are a direct member of listA or they are a nested member" - this sounds like a direct member?

"they are a nested member of any list that is a direct member of listA" - I'm also not clear here. We currently allow nested membership with depth of 10.

```

Access list owners are listed directly in the access list spec, they can either
be direct user owners or other lists can be named as owners.
When an access list `a` is named as an owner of access list `b`, all _members_
of `a` become owners of `b` and receive the grants.
Owners of `a` do not become owners of `b`.

### Materialization of scoped role assignments

The term "materialization" is used here to mean the computation and storage of
concrete scoped role assignments from their source of truth, which is the
current set of access lists and access list members.
Rather than referencing access lists (and memberships) and traversing the graph
during scoped login events, the set of materialized scoped role assignments
will be computed ahead of time and stored in the scoped role assignment cache.
The reasoning for this is to ensure that teleport can efficiently determine the
full set of scoped privileges in user-facing hot paths, without the need to
relogin.
Being able to efficiently discover scopes at which a user has privileges
without requiring reauthentication is critical for a good user experience.

Every (user, list) pair, where user is a nested member or owner of list and

> list grants scoped roles, will result in 1 materialized scoped role assignment.

Reviewer 2: I think direct members should also have materialized assignments. I guess that was the intended meaning. To me "nested members" means members which are assigned to the nested access list.

user has privileges without requiring reauthentication and the resulting scoped
role assignment materialization strategy, some limitations will apply to access
lists that assign scoped roles and their member lists.

We do not want scoped role assignments to depend directly on user traits, which
are dynamic and may change on relogin as they are assigned by an external IdP.
To maintain this, any access list that grants a scoped role must not include any
`membership_requires` or `ownership_requires` block.
These blocks normally prevent access list membership from applying based on
user traits.
This limitation will apply to access lists that directly grant scoped roles,
and any of their member lists (which would transitively grant scoped roles).

This will be enforced during access list and access list member creation on a
best effort basis since strict enforcement would require full access list graph
traversal while holding a global lock.
If membership or ownership requires blocks end up being added to an access list
that grants scoped roles, the scoped_role_assignment materializer will detect
the change, log the invalid list, and stop materializing

> scoped_role_assignments for memberships in that list.

Reviewer: 👍  If this behavior is logged / auditable so it’s clearly visible to admins - then I think it’s totally acceptable. We can also align the UI later to make these cases easier to spot and understand.

Taking a global lock just to enforce a full check feels like unnecessary overhead, and it also doesn’t align with our plan to remove the global lock in the near future.

an assignment referencing a deleted role or attempting to assign it at a scope
that is no longer permissible.

While this limitation does not directly block access list implementation,
scoped role assignments via access lists may be broken or error-prone in some
edge cases.
The plan is to implement a model for handling invalid or dangling assignments
where all assignments will be checked when they are loaded, and invalid
assignments will be dropped.

### Identity provider sync

Teleport already has multiple integrations with third party identity providers
that automatically import groups and create Access Lists to model them in
Teleport with bidirectional sync.
These include AWS IAM Identity Center, Microsoft Entra ID, Okta, and SailPoint.

At least initially, we will not alter these integrations to automatically
create access lists granting scoped roles.
Instead, admins can create other access lists to grant scoped roles, and define
the IdP imported access lists as members of those lists.

### Security

#### Invariants

* Access lists can only assign scoped roles that exist
* Access lists can only assign roles to an assignable_scope of the role.

> Backend key `/scoped_role/role_lock/<role-name>` is already randomized every

Reviewer: The `scoped_role/role_lock` seems to be a internal mechanism(That is not introduced in this RFD or in the Scopes RFD) . Could you briefly explain what it does ?

Author: reworded with a better explanation in 7ba38e94

### Proto Specification

```diff
--- a/api/proto/teleport/accesslist/v1/accesslist.proto
+++ b/api/proto/teleport/accesslist/v1/accesslist.proto
@@ -169,6 +169,19 @@ message AccessListGrants {
   // traits are the traits that are granted to users who are members of the
   // Access List.
   repeated teleport.trait.v1.Trait traits = 2;
+
+  // scoped_roles are the scoped roles that are granted to users who are
+  // members of the Access List.
+  repeated ScopedRoleGrant scoped_roles = 3;
+}
+
+// ScopedRoleGrant describes a scoped role granted at a specific scope.
+message ScopedRoleGrant {
+  // role is the name of the scoped role to be granted.
+  string role = 1;
+  // scope is the scope the role will be assigned at. It must be an assignable
+  // scope of the role.
+  string scope = 2;
 }
```

### Scale

The current design materializes scoped role assignments for each (user, list)
pair where user is a member of list, this could scale to large numbers of
resources that will consume memory on the auth service.
This is discussed in [Materialization of scoped role assignments](#materialization-of-scoped-role-assignments).

### Backward Compatibility

> This is a new feature with limited backward compatibility considerations.

Reviewer 2: I think we should define what happens during the downgrade and how to handle it. It should be fine to be backward compatible here if we don't do too much CheckAndSetDefaults during read operations.

Author: I mention this now in [7dca69f](https://github.com/gravitational/teleport/pull/62814/commits/7dca69f95543f84108cb3bceb043ed913b6359d1)

    scope: /ops/west
  - role: ops-access
    scope: /ops
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
version: v1
---
kind: scoped_role_assignment
sub_kind: materialized
metadata:
  name: acl-west-admins-bob@example.com
scope: /
spec:
  user: bob@example.com
  assignments:
  - role: ops-admin
    scope: /ops/west
  - role: ops-access
    scope: /ops
status:
  origin:
    creator: access_list
    creator_name: west-admins
    date_created: "2025-12-18T04:00:00Z"
version: v1
```

These "materialized" scoped role assignments would be inserted into the scoped
role assignment cache.
Everything that already works with scoped role assignments today will not need
to know or care about access lists, they will just handle the resulting
assignments as usual.

We will introduce `sub_kind: materialized` to distinguish materialized
scoped_role_assignments from user-created ones and prevent name collisions.
Materialized assignments will be named `acl-<list-name>-<user-name>`, but this
will not be guaranteed to be stable into the future.
Access lists with a sub_kind will use `<name>/<sub_kind>` as a primary key in

> the backend and the cache.

Author: my bad, only scoped_role_assignments will have a sub_kind, fixed

and edges are access list memberships.

### Owner grants

Access lists can grant privileges not only to members but also to owners of the
list under the `owner_grants` field, this will also support scoped role grants.

```yaml
kind: access_list
metadata:
  name: owner-grants-example
spec:
  title: "owner grants"
  owner_grants:
    scoped_roles:
      - role: ops-admin
        scope: /ops/west
      - role: ops-access
        scope: /ops
  owners:
    - name: alice@example.com
      membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_USER
    - name: admins
      membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_LIST
version: v1
```

Access list owners are listed directly in the access list spec, they can either
be direct user owners or other lists can be named as owners.
When an access list `a` is named as an owner of access list `b`, all _members_
of `a` become owners of `b` and receive the grants.
Owners of `a` do not become owners of `b`.

### Materialization of scoped role assignments

The term "materialization" is used here to mean the computation and storage of
concrete scoped role assignments from their source of truth, which is the
current set of access lists and access list members.

> Rather than referencing access lists (and memberships) and traversing the graph

Reviewer 4: Materialization should very much be an internal implementation detail that customers should not need to know about. Much the same as they don't need to know about or understand how roles and permissions are derived and applied internally from access lists today.

> Rather than referencing access lists (and memberships) and traversing the graph

Reviewer 3: > Even explaining materialization to a customer is going to be a tall task for the support team.

I wanted to push back on this specifically.  The only meaningful user-facing difference between teleport having materialization or not, is that if teleport has materialization then when a user says "list all role assignments for user X", the list shows the manually created assignments _and_ the assignments created via access lists, instead of just the assignments created via access lists.  IMO if anything that will lead to less support load, as it is the more sensible answer to the question the user was asking.  Instead of needing to search through multiple different config objects of different kinds to aggregate an understanding of what the user's roles are.

Materialized assignments will be named `acl-<list-name>-<user-name>`, but this
will not be guaranteed to be stable into the future.
Scoped role assignments with a sub_kind will use `<name>/<sub_kind>` as a
primary key in the backend and the scoped access cache.

### Inherited list membership

Access list members can either be users or other access lists.
When listA has member listB, it means that all members of listB are inherited
members of listA.
In this case listA has delegated part of its membership definition to listB.
In general, a user is a member of listA if they are an explicit member of
listA or they are a member of any list that is an explicit or inherited member
of listA.

For example, consider an access list named `west-access` that grants access to
SSH servers in the `/ops/west` scope.
If an admin wanted to grant SSH access to all members of the `west-users` and
`west-admins` lists, they could make `west-users` and `west-admins` members of
the `west-access` list.
In doing this, the `west-access` list would be delegating the definition of
its user members to its member lists.
All members of `west-users` and `west-admins` would become inherited members of

> the `west-access` list.

Reviewer 2: Maybe it's easier to say that member lists inherit the grants of their parent lists.

Nested list memberships effectively form a graph where nodes are access lists
and edges are access list memberships.

### Owner grants

Access lists can grant privileges not only to members but also to owners of the
list under the `owner_grants` field, this will also support scoped role grants.

```yaml
kind: access_list
metadata:
  name: owner-grants-example
spec:
  title: "owner grants"
  owner_grants:
    scoped_roles:
      - role: ops-admin
        scope: /ops/west
      - role: ops-access
        scope: /ops
  owners:
    - name: alice@example.com
      membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_USER
    - name: admins
      membership_kind: MEMBERSHIP_KIND_LIST
version: v1
```

Access list owners are listed directly in the access list spec, they can either
be direct user owners or other lists can be named as owners.
When an access list `a` is named as an owner of access list `b`, all _members_

> of `a` become owners of `b` and receive the grants.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
of `a` become owners of `b` and inherit the `b`'s owner grants.
```

user has privileges without requiring reauthentication and the resulting scoped
role assignment materialization strategy, some limitations will apply to access
lists that assign scoped roles and their member lists.

We do not want scoped role assignments to depend directly on user traits, which
are dynamic and may change on relogin as they are assigned by an external IdP.
To maintain this, any access list that grants a scoped role must not include any
`membership_requires` or `ownership_requires` block.
These blocks normally prevent access list membership from applying based on
user traits.
This limitation will apply to access lists that directly grant scoped roles,
and any of their member lists (which would transitively grant scoped roles).

This will be enforced during access list and access list member creation on a
best effort basis since strict enforcement would require full access list graph
traversal while holding a global lock.
If membership or ownership requires blocks end up being added to an access list
that grants scoped roles, the scoped_role_assignment materializer will detect
the change, log the invalid list, and stop materializing

> scoped_role_assignments for memberships in that list.

Reviewer 2: We are talking only about the nested lists here?

E.g. scenario:

- "parent" list granting scoped role
- "nested" list inheriting the grant of the scoped role
- updating "parent" with requirements fials
- updating "nested" with requirements results in the scoped_role_assignment materializer not materialzing assignments and removing all existing materialized assignments for the "nested" list, but it still materializes assignments for "parent" or any other nested list that doesn't specify requirements

Is that correct? Should we include an example?

In this case it will check that the change doesn't invalidate any assignments
in extant access lists, and will continue to use AtomicWrite to verify that
`/scoped_role/role_lock/<role-name>` hasn't concurrently changed.

DeleteScopedRole will continue to use AtomicWrite to verify that
`/scoped_role/role_lock/<role-name>` hasn't concurrently changed to verify that
no new access lists reference it.

* Access lists that assign scoped roles cannot contain `membership_requires` or `ownership_requires`

UpsertAccessList and UpdateAccessList will statically verify that the list
cannot contain both scoped role grants and requirement blocks.

* Member lists of lists that assign scoped roles cannot contain
  `membership_requires` or `ownership_requires`

UpdateAccessList (if it adds a scoped role assignment or requirement block),
and access list member creation methods, will have to traverse the access list
graph to assert that no transitive members of access lists that grant scoped
roles can contain requirement blocks.

It's likely to be prohibitively expensive to do this check while holding a
global backend lock (and it's not clear if it's possible to implement with

> AtomicWrite) so this check will be best-effort.

Author: > If we agree to keep the access list depth limited to 10, then an atomic update should still be feasible to implement.

I think I disagree, while the depth may be limited to 10 can't each list have an unlimited number of direct parent or child lists? So the depth could be 1 but you could have >100 parent lists to check, AtomicWrite doesn't support locking on that many resource revisions. You'd also have to lock on some synthetic resource describing (all access_list_members where <list> is a member or parent) to prevent new members/parents being added while running the check

I'm not saying the implementation won't even try to do the check. It will just do it without grabbing the global lock so it will be fallible. If there are few enough members/ancestors it may even use AtomicWrite optimistically. I just don't think it is possible to guarantee in the worst case without a global lock.

If we fail safe by having the materializer ignore membership paths through a list containing membership/ownership_requires blocks, I think it can be acceptable, do you disagree?
